



'''Maputo''' (), officially named '''Lourenço Marques''' until 1976, is the capital and most populous city of Mozambique. The city is named after chief Maputsu I of the Tembe clan, a subgroup of the Tsonga people. Located near the southern end of the country, it is positioned within 120 km (75 miles) of the Eswatini and South Africa borders. The city has a population of 1,088,449 (as of 2017) distributed over a land area of 347.69 km2 (134 sq mi). The Maputo metropolitan area includes the neighbouring city of Matola, and has a total population of 2,717,437. Maputo is a port city, with an economy centered on commerce. It is also noted for its vibrant cultural scene and distinctive, eclectic architecture.

Maputo is situated on a large natural bay on the Indian Ocean, near where the rivers Tembe, Mbuluzi, Matola and Infulene converge. The city consists of seven administrative divisions, which are each subdivided into quarters or ''bairros''. The city is surrounded by Maputo Province, but is administered as a self-contained, separate province since 1998. Maputo City is the geographically smallest and most densely populated province in Mozambique. Maputo is a cosmopolitan city, with Bantu, Tsonga languages being more common, Portuguese, and, to a lesser extent, Arabic, Indian, and Chinese languages and cultures present.

The area on which Maputo stands was first settled as a fishing village by ancient Tsonga people. It was soon named Lourenço Marques, after the navigator of the same name who explored the area in 1544. The modern city traces its origins to a Portuguese fort established on the site in 1781. A town grew around the fort starting around 1850, and in 1877 it was elevated to city status. In 1898, the colony of Portuguese Mozambique relocated its capital there. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Lourenço Marques grew both in population and economic development as a port city. Upon Mozambican independence in 1975, the city became the national capital and was renamed Maputo. During the Mozambican Civil War, the city's economy was devastated. When the war ended, the FRELIMO government launched a program to revive the city's economy, and to clean up the city by forcibly removing criminals, squatters, and undocumented residents.

Maputo has a number of landmarks, including Independence Square, City Hall, Maputo Fortress, the central market, Tunduru Gardens, and Maputo Railway Station. Maputo is known as an aesthetically attractive, if dilapidated, city. With wide avenues lined by jacaranda and acacia trees, it has earned the nicknames ''City of Acacias'' and the ''Pearl of the Indian Ocean''. The city is known for its distinct, eclectic architecture, with Portuguese colonial Neoclassical and Manueline styles alongside modern Art Deco, Bauhaus, and Brutalist buildings. The historic ''Baixa de Maputo'' district is the downtown area. Maputo has a vibrant cultural scene, with many restaurants, music and performance venues, and local film industry. Maputo's economy is centered around its port, through which much of Mozambique's imports and exports are shipped. The chief exports include cotton, sugar, chromite, sisal, copra, and hardwood. In addition to trade, the city has robust manufacturing and service sectors. Several colleges and universities are located in Maputo, including Pedagogical University, São Tomás University, Catholic University of Mozambique, and Eduardo Mondlane University, the oldest in the country.

==History==

View of Lourenço Marques, c. 1905
Cathedral of Maputo

On the northern bank of Espírito Santo Estuary of Delagoa Bay, an inlet of the Indian Ocean, Lourenço Marques was named after the Portuguese navigator who, with António Caldeira, was sent in 1544 by the governor of Mozambique on a voyage of exploration. They explored the lower courses of the rivers emptying their waters into Delagoa Bay, notably the Espírito Santo. The forts and trading stations that the Portuguese established, abandoned and reoccupied on the north bank of the river were all named "Lourenço Marques". The existing town dates from about 1850, with the previous settlement having been entirely destroyed by the natives. The town developed around a Portuguese fortress completed in 1787.

On 9 December 1876, Lourenço Marques was elevated to the status of village, and on the 10 November 1887 it became a city. The Luso-British conflict for the possession of Lourenço Marques ended on the 24th of July 1875 with Patrice de MacMahon, the French President, ruling in favour of Portugal.

In 1871, the town was described as a poor place, with narrow streets, fairly good flat-roofed houses, grass huts, decayed forts, and a rusty cannon, enclosed by a recently erected wall  high and protected by bastions at intervals. The growing importance of the Transvaal led, however, to greater interest being taken back in Portugal in the development of a port. A commission was sent by the Portuguese government in 1876 to drain the marshy land near the settlement, to plant the blue gum tree, and to build a hospital and a church. A city since 1887, it superseded the Island of Mozambique as the capital of Mozambique in 1898. In 1895, the opening of the NZASM railroad to Pretoria, South Africa, caused the city's population to grow. The Witwatersrand Gold Rush, which began in 1886, also increased the economic development of the city in the late 19th and early 20th centuries as Lourenço Marques served as the closest seaport for the export of gold from South Africa.
The Monument to the Great War, a memorial to the Africans and Europeans who died during World War I

In the early 20th century, with a well equipped seaport, with piers, quays, landing sheds and electric cranes which enabled large vessels to discharge cargoes direct into the railway trucks, Lourenço Marques developed under Portuguese rule and achieved great importance as a lively cosmopolitan city. It was served by British, Portuguese, and German liners, and the majority of its imported goods were shipped to Southampton, Lisbon, and Hamburg.

With the continuous growth of the city's population due to its expanding economy centered on the seaport, from the 1940s Portugal's administration built a network of primary and secondary schools, industrial and commercial schools as well as the first university in the region. The University of Lourenço Marques was opened in 1962. Portuguese, Islamic (including Ismailis), Indian (including from Portuguese India) and Chinese (including Macanese) communities — but not the unskilled African majority — achieved great prosperity by developing the industrial and commercial sectors of the city. Urban areas of Mozambique grew quickly in this period due to the lack of restriction on the internal migration of indigenous Mozambicans, a situation that differed from the apartheid policies of neighboring South Africa. Before Mozambique's independence in 1975, thousands of tourists from South Africa and Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) frequented the city and its scenic beaches, high-quality hotels, restaurants, casinos, and brothels.

The Mozambique Liberation Front, or FRELIMO, formed in Tanzania in 1962 and led by Eduardo Mondlane, fought for independence from Portuguese rule. The Mozambican War of Independence lasted over 10 years, ending only in 1974 when the Estado Novo regime was overthrown in Lisbon by a leftist military coup — the Carnation Revolution. The new government of Portugal granted independence to almost all Portuguese overseas territories (except for Timor Leste and Macau).

The words "Aqui é Portugal" (''Here is Portugal'') were once inscribed on the walkway of its municipal building.

===Independence===
Independence Square, Maputo

The People's Republic of Mozambique was proclaimed on 25 June 1975 in accordance with the Lusaka Accord signed in September 1974. A parade and a state banquet completed the independence festivities in the capital, which was expected to be renamed Can Phumo, or "Place of Phumo," after a Shangaan chief who lived in the area before the Portuguese navigator Lourenço Marques first visited the site in 1545 and gave his name to it. However, after independence, the city's name was changed (in February 1976) to Maputo. Maputo's name reputedly has its origin in the Maputo River: in fact, this river, which marks the border with South Africa in the far South of Mozambique, had become symbolic during the FRELIMO-led armed struggle against Portuguese sovereignty, after the motto «''Viva Moçambique unido, do Rovuma ao Maputo''», that is, ''Hail Mozambique, united from Rovuma down to Maputo'' (Rovuma is the river which marks the border with Tanzania in the far North).

After the independence, the statues to Portuguese heroes in the capital city were removed and most were stored at the fortress. Black soldiers carrying Russian rifles replaced Portuguese Army soldiers (both black and white) with western arms in city barracks and on the streets. Most of the city's streets, originally named for Portuguese heroes or important dates in Portuguese history, had their names changed to African languages, revolutionary figures, or pre-colonial historical names.

After the Carnation Revolution in Lisbon, over 250,000 Portuguese pulled out virtually overnight, leaving Mozambique's economy and administration unmanageable. With the exodus of trained Portuguese personnel, the newly independent country had no time to allocate resources to maintain its well-developed infrastructure. In addition, authoritarian Stalinist policies and bureaucratic central planning made the newly independent country slip into an extremely precarious condition since the beginning, and so the economy plummeted. FRELIMO, now the governing party, turned to the communist governments of the Soviet Union and East Germany for help. By the early 1980s the country was bankrupt. Money was worthless and shops were empty. Starting shortly after independence, the country was plagued by the Mozambican Civil War, a long and violent struggle between FRELIMO and RENAMO, which lasted from 1977 to 1992. The war adversely affected economic activity and political stability in the city. "Operation Production" (''Operação Produção'') was inaugurated in 1983 by the ruling FRELIMO party to deal with the economic crisis. Undocumented residents of Maputo, the "parasitic" urban population, as well as individuals who displayed criminal behavior, were forcibly transferred to state-owned communal farms and villages in the rural north of Mozambique.

Since the peace agreement ending the civil war, which was signed in 1992, the country and the city has returned to its pre-independence levels of political stability. This stability is an encouraging sign that makes Mozambique a promising country for foreign investment.

On 11 July 2003, the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, better known as the Maputo Protocol, was adopted in the city by the African Union.

==Geography==
Maputo, seen from the International Space Station
 A view of the city

Maputo is located on the west side of Maputo Bay, near the Estuário do Espírito Santo where the four rivers Tembe, Umbeluzi, Matola and Infulene drain. The bay is  long and  wide. At the extreme east of the city and bay is the island of Inhaca. The total area covered by the municipality of Maputo is  and borders the city of Matola northeast and east, the districts of Marracuene to the north; Boane in the east and Matutuíne at the south all of which are part of Maputo Province. The city is  from the South African border at Ressano Garcia and  from the border with Eswatini near the town of Namaacha.


==Administrative subdivisions==
Districts of Maputo

The city is divided into seven main administrative divisions. Each of these consists of several smaller city quarters or ''bairros''.






 Administrative Division 

 City Quarters or ''Bairros''



KaMpfumo

 Central A/B/C – Alto Maé A/B – Malhangalene A/B – Polana Cimento A/B – Coop – Sommerschield



Nlhamankulu

 Aeroporto A/B – Xipamanine – Minkadjuíne – Unidade 7 – Chamanculo A/B/C/D – Malanga – Munhuana



KaMaxaquene

 Mafalala – Maxaquene A/B/C/D – Polana Caniço A/B – Urbanização



KaMavota

 Mavalane A/B – FPLM – Hulene A/B – Ferroviário – Laulane – 3 de Fevereiro – Mahotas – Albazine – Costa do Sol



KaMubukwana

 Bagamoyo – George Dimitrov (Benfica) – Inhagoia A/B – Jardim – Luís Cabral – Magoanine – Malhazine – Nsalene – 25 de Junho A/B(Choupal) – Zimpeto



KaTembe

 Gwachene – Chale – Inguice – Ncassene – Xamissava



KaNyaka

 Ingwane – Ribjene – Nhaquene





==Climate==
Maputo features a tropical savanna climate (''Aw'') bordering on a hot semi-arid climate (''BSh'') under the Köppen climate classification. Maputo is a relatively dry city, averaging  of precipitation per year. Precipitation is abundant during summer and only little during winter. The city has a relatively warm climate averaging a mean temperature of . The hottest month is January with a mean temperature of , while the coolest month is July with a mean temperature of .



Situated on the Indian Ocean, Maputo is particularly vulnerable to climate impacts such as cyclones, flooding and sea level rise. Poverty and inequality, which are concentrated in the overpopulated bairros, further exacerbate climate change vulnerabilities in the city.

==Infrastructure==
The Hotel Polana
Central Bank of Mozambique
Municipal Market of Maputo

The central area of Maputo corresponds to a planned city with square blocks and wide avenues, with Portuguese traces and their typical architecture of the 1970s. After the Carnation Revolution (1974) military coup in Lisbon, Portuguese refugees fled in massive numbers close to the date of independence (1975), and the resultant lack of skills and capital, in the context of a fierce civil war and government mismanagement, contributed to its state of dereliction in the years following these events. Nevertheless, the city itself was never damaged, since it was tacitly considered neutral ground during both the colonial and the civil war.

Recovery of the older infrastructure has been slow and most property developers in recent years have decided to invest in the construction of new properties rather than rehabilitating any of the existing ones. The rates for property in the city are high as investment increases, larger numbers of businesses are hoping to locate within easy reach of the airports, banks and other facilities. The infrastructure is expected to spread out across vacant areas of the city hopefully easing property prices within the next couple of years.

Maputo faces many challenges, such as poor transport and drainage infrastructure, which have profound implications on people’s livelihoods, particularly in informal settlements. Inadequate planning regulation and law enforcement, as well as perceived corruption in government processes, lack of communication across government departments and lack of concern or government coordination with respect to building codes are major impediments to progressing the development of Maputo's infrastructure, according to the Climate & Development Knowledge Network.

As a coastal city, Maputo is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of sea level rise, and population growth is putting increasing pressure on the coastal areas.

Despite its Portuguese heritage, all vehicles are right-hand drive and drive on the left hand side of the road.

===Land is not for sale===
Another more general impediment is often attributed to land which is legally not for sale in Mozambique. All land is property of the state for which the state grants the rights to use the land. This presupposition combined with historical problems in managing inheritance and documentation have led to complications which discourage investment and expansion of the city.

Land, while not sold officially, is actively traded and exchanged on a secondary market leading to the development of unplanned areas and slums in metropolitan areas which the Government, due to the lack of tax money, has no capacity and infrastructure to deal with. The result of such policies is manifested in a crowded CBD, inadequate transport network and crumbling roads.

===PROMAPUTO===
In 2007, the municipality of Maputo began a project to seriously consider rehabilitating the city's infrastructure. PROMAPUTO was a project that began as co-operation between the local city council and the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank. The first phase (PROMAPUTO1) took place between 2007 and 2010 and was chiefly concerned with developing the systems, knowledge and planning required to support the gradual overhaul of the infrastructure. The project was broken into several key areas and a budget allocated to each of these, namely: Institutional Development, Financial Sustainability, Urban Planning, Urban Infrastructure Investment and Maintenance, Metropolitan Development (services such as waste collection and disposal). The total financial allocation for this phase was USD 30 million. Little was done, however.
Maputo's central mail station

In 2011, PROMAPUTO2, the second phase of the project began. This phase was to last until 2015 and a total of USD 105 million was spent. The plan called for an IT systems, Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) together with Geographic Information System (GIS). These systems would supposedly help the municipality control its budgets and manage tenders, while the GIS would allow for precise information about land location and titling to be kept. Several roads should have been expanded and improved and the Avenida Julius Nyerere finally completed. Financial sustainability for the project was to be guaranteed through the improved collection of property tax (IPRA). The project also coincided with the recent overhaul of the Road Safety and Traffic Regulations (final completion 2020) which was an antiquated system that had not seen changes since the 1950s. Amongst the new regulations, heavy penalties and fines would now apply to many detrimental actions done by automobiles, such as pollution, loud noises, and illegal maneuvers.

Electronic parking meters have now been installed in some areas of the CBD to curb a chronic shortage and wrongful use of parking space.

===Building projects===
On November 10, 2018, the Maputo–Katembe bridge, Africa's largest suspension bridge, was inaugurated, connecting the cities of Maputo and Katembe

In spite of its previous instability, Mozambique is experiencing one of the fastest growth rates for a developing country in the world. The projected growth rate for 2011 is expected to be around 7.5%, some of it centered on the construction of several capital intensive projects in Maputo. Some of the more notable developments include Edificio 24, a mixed-use development that will be located at the center of the city along Avenida 24 Julho and Avenida Salvador Allende. The Maputo Business Tower is a modern 19-story building. The Radisson Blu corporation  has  constructed a 22 story hotel with 256 rooms in one of the city's trendiest spots on the ''marginal'' along the beach. A 15-story building for the second largest telecommunication company in the country, Vodacom, was projected to be completed in 2010. The regeneration of the Maputo waterfront is an urban regeneration project that is being developed at site of the former annual industrial fair grounds (FACIM).

===Rehabilitation projects===
In February 2011, president Armando Guebuza announced that the Vila Algarve would be restored to its former condition and the building transformed into a museum for the veterans of the civil war. The Vila Algarve belonged to the International and State Defence Police (PIDE) during colonial rule. It was where political prisoners and others accused of conspiring to harm the regime were taken for interrogation and torture. There are claims that several individuals were executed in the building. No dates have been released on when the renovation is to commence. The building has changed ownership several times and has been an off-on residence for squatters.

===Sports facilities===

Maputo has a number of stadiums designed for football, which can be modified for other purposes, such as the new Estádio do Zimpeto, Estádio do Maxaquene and the Estádio do Costa do Sol which can seat 32,000, 15,000 and 10,000 people respectively. The largest stadium in the Metropolitan Area is, however, the Estádio da Machava (opened as Estádio Salazar), located in neighbouring Matola municipality. It opened in 1968, in Machava and was at the time the most advanced in the country conforming to standards set by FIFA and the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI). The cycling track could be adjusted to allow for 20,000 more seats. It was the site where Portugal officially handed over the country to Samora Machel and FRELIMO on 25 June 1975. In 2005, the Birmingham based reggae group UB40 held a one-night-only concert in the stadium filled to maximum capacity. A newer stadium called the Estádio do Zimpeto which is located in the suburb of Zimpeto will be opened in 2011. The stadium will be built in time for the 2011 All-Africa Games with a capacity for 42,000 spectators. A smaller football stadium, Estádio Mahafil, holds 4,000 people.

Beginning in the 1950s, motorsport was introduced to the city. At first race cars would compete in areas around the city, Polana and along the ''marginal'' but as funding and interest increased, a dedicated race track was built in the Costa Do Sol area along and behind the ''marginal'' with the ocean to the east with a length of . The initial surface of the new track, named Autódromo de Lourenço Marques did not provide enough grip and an accident in the late 1960s killed 8 people and injured many more. Therefore, in 1970, the track was renovated and the surface changed to meet the safety requirements that were needed at large events with many spectators. The length then increased to . The city became host to several international and local events beginning with the inauguration on 26 November 1970. The track was abandoned after 1975 and events only occurred sporadically such as in 1981 when the government allowed the sport again. Since 2000, interest has been rekindled by the Automovel & Touring Club de Moçambique (ATCM) and several events including go-carting, drag racing and motocross are planned.

The city's main basketball arena is the Pavilhão do Maxaquene which holds up to 3,500 people. It is home to Ferroviário de Maputo which competes in the Basketball Africa League and the Mozambican Basketball League.

===Street names===

The street names were changed after independence in 1975. Close ties with the Eastern Bloc highly influenced the new names that were chosen as did removal of names referring to colonial era figures.




 Street names in Lourenço Marques and Maputo



 Lourenço Marques

 Maputo



 18 de Maio, Avenida

 Avenida Mártires de Inhaminga



 31 de Janeiro, Avenida

 Avenida Agostinho Neto



 5 de Outubro, Avenida

 Avenida Josina Machel



 7 de Março,

 Praça 25 de Junho



 Afonso de Albuquerque, Avenida

 Avenida Ahmed Sekou Touré



 Aires de Ornelas, Rua

 Rua de Kassuende



 Alexandre Herculano, Rua

 Rua Timor Leste



 Almirante Canto e Castro, Avenida

 Avenida da Tanzania



 Álvares Cabral, Avenida

 Avenida Zedequias Manganhela



 Álvaro de Castro, Museu

 Museu de História Natural



 Alves Correia, Avenida

 Avenida da Zambia



 Amarela, Casa

 Museu Nacional da Moeda



 Anchieta, Avenida

 Avenida Olof Palme



 Andrade Corvo, Avenida

 Avenida Ho Chi Min



 Andrade Corvo, Escola

 Escola Primária do 1º e 2º Graus 16 de Junho



 António Enes, Avenida de

 Avenida Julius Nyerere



 António Enes, Liceu

 Escola Secundária Francisco Manyanga



 António de Oliveira Salazar, Rua

 Rua da Mesquita



 Aquário, Cabaret

 Escola Nacional de Dança



 Araújo, Rua Major

 Rua Bagamoyo



 Atneu Grego, Edifício do

 Palácio dos Casamentos



 Augusto de Castilho, Avenida

 Avenida Vladimir Lenine



 Aviadores, Rua dos

 Rua da Argélia



 Banco Nacional Ultramarino, Edifício do

 Banco de Moçambique



 Bartolomeu Dias, Rua

 Avenida Mártires de Mueda



 Belegard da Silva, Avenida

 Avenida Francisco O. Magumbwé



 Caldas Xavier, Avenida

 Avenida Marian N'gouabi



 Câmara Municipal, Edifício da

 Conselho Executivo



 Consiglieri Pedroso, Rua

 Rua Revolução de Outubro



 Couceiro da Costa, Avenida

 Avenida Armando Tivane



 Desportivo de Lourenço Marques, Grupo

 Grupo Desportivo de Maputo



 Dicca, Cinema, Estudio 222

 Matchedje Cine-Estúdio 222



 Diogo Cão, Avenida

 Avenida Lucas Luali



 Direcção Geral das Alfândegas, Edifício da

 Reitoria da Universidade Eduardo Mondlane



 Doutor Serrão, Avenida do

 Avenida Emília Daússe



 Dr. Brito Camacho, Rua do

 Avenida Patrice Lumumba



 Dom João de Castro, Avenida

 Rua Dom João de Castro



 Dom Luiz 1º, Avenida

 Avenida Samora Machel



 Dom Manuel I, Avenida

 Avenida da Marginal



 Duques de Connaught, Avenida dos

 Avenida Friedrich Engels



 Eduardo Costa, Rua

 Rua de Mukumbura



 Estâncias, Estrada das

 Rua das Estâncias



 Fazenda, Edifício da

 Conselho de Ministros



 Fernandes Tomaz, Avenida

 Avenida Mártires da Machava



 Fonte Luminosa, Praça da

 Praça Robert Mugabe



 Funchal, Prédio

 Hotel Rovuma



 Gago Coutinho, Aeroporto

 Aeroporto de Mavalane



 General Bettencourt, Avenida do

 Rua da Base Ntchinga



 General Botha, Rua do

 Avenida Tomás Nduda



 General Craveiro Lopes, Avenida

 Avenida dos Accordos de Lusaka



 General Machado, Avenida do

 Avenida Guerra Popular



 General Machado, Escola

 Universidade Pedagógica



 General Rosado, Rua do

 Avenida Kim Il Sung



 Gomes Freire, Avenida

 Avenida Paulo Samuel Kankhomba



 Governador Simas, Rua do

 Rua Mateus Sansão Muthemba



 Guerra Junqueiro, Rua

 Rua José Mateus



 Heróis de Marracuene, Rua dos

 Rua da Resistência



 Hotel Clube

 Centro Cultural Franco-Moçambicano



 Infante, Cinema

 Cinema Charlot



 João Albasini, Largo

 Praça 21 de Outubro



 João Belo, Escola Primária

 Escola Primária 7 de Setembro



 João das Regras, Rua

 Rua de Nachingwea



 João de Deus, Avenida

 Avenida Romão Fernandes Farinha



 José Cabral, Parque

 Parque dos Continuadores



 Joaquim de Araújo, Escola

 Escola Secundária Estrela Vermelha



 Lapa, Rua

 Rua Joaquim Lapa



 Lar Moderno, Edifício do

 Centro de Estudos Brasileiro



 Latino Coelho, Avenida

 Avenida Maguiguana



 Lidemburgo, Rua de

 Avenida Rio Tembe



 Lisboa, Miradouro de

 Miradouro



 Lisboa, Rua de

 Avenida Milagre Mabote



 Luciano Cordeiro, Avenida

 Avenida Albert Luthuli



 Mac Mahon, Praça

 Praça dos Trabalhadores



 Manuel de Arriaga, Avenida

 Avenida Karl Marx



 Manuel Rodrigues, Cinema

 Cine Teatro África



 Massano de Amorim, Avenida

 Avenida Mao Tsé Tung



 Mendonça Barreto, Avenida

 Avenida do Rio Limpopo



 Mouzinho de Albuquerque, Praça

 Praça da Independência



 Nevala, Rua de

 Avenida Nkwam Nkruma



 Nossa Senhora de Fátima, Avenida

 Avenida Kenneth Kaunda



 Oliveira Salazar, Estádio

 Estádio da Machava



 Paiva de Andrada, Avenida

 Avenida Mahomed Siad Barre



 Paiva Manso, Avenida

 Avenida Filipe Samuel Magaia



 Pero da Covilhã, Rua

 Rua Belmiro O. Muianga



 Pero de Alenquer, Rua

 Avenida Amílcar Cabral



 Pesca Desportiva, Clube de

 Escola Náutica de Moçambique



 Pinheiro Chagas, Avenida

 Avenida Eduardo Mondlane



 Porto, Rua do

 Rua Malhangalene



 Princesa Patrícia, Rua da

 Avenida Salvador Allende



 Rebelo da Silva, Escola Primária

 Escola Primária 3 de Fevereiro



 República, Avenida da

 Avenida 25 de Setembro



 Sagres, Rua de

 Avenida 10 de Novembro



 Salazar, Liceu

 Escola Secundária Josina Machel



 Sporting Clube de Lourenço Marques

 Clube de Desportos Maxaquene



 Turismo, Hotel

 Hotel Ibis



 Vasco da Gama, Jardim

 Jardim Tunduro



 Vasco da Gama, Mercado

 Mercado Municipal (Bazar da Baixa)





==Transport==
===Airports===
Maputo International Airport

Maputo International Airport is the main international airport of Mozambique. The new terminal was opened in 2010 with a capacity for 900,000 passengers per year. Work has begun on the construction of a new domestic terminal which will have a capacity for many more passengers at any given time. The construction work will require the current building to be demolished.

===Buses===
Maputo's transportation needs are mainly served by minibus taxis called ''chapas'', which are believed to transport the majority of the city's commuters. In an effort to resolve a public transport crisis in the city, the state-owned company, Transporte de Moçambique (TPM) has recently acquired a new fleet of 270+ buses. There are three major bus terminals in the city: at Baixa (downtown/central), Museu (Museum), and at Junta (regional and national buses).

===Ferries===
24 de Julho Avenue, Maputo
The Maputo Railway Station, an example of colonial architecture

Ferry boats departing from Maputo to the district of KaTembe are available during the week. A ferry can carry approximately 20 vehicles per trip.

===Rails===
The city of maputo lies at the end of three railway lines: Goba railway, Limpopo railway and Pretoria–Maputo railway.

====Trams====
Maputo was home to one of the first electric tramway systems in Africa, commencing in February 1904. At first the lines ran from the Central Railway Station (CFM) to the City Municipality building. It is said that the establishment of the tram system caused some protests from the general public as certain classes had limited access to its use. Trams lost favor in the second half of the 20th century as cars and buses became more common, and they have not been in use at all since 1936, although parts of some of the tracks can still be seen coming up through the tar in certain streets, like Av. 24 de Julho.

===Ports===

Maputo's harbour is very important economically to the city.

The main port of Maputo handled 17 million tons of cargo in 1971, at its peak. It was part of the trio of Mozambique's main ports for the Nacala-Beira-Maputo route. Today, it is managed by the Maputo Port Development Company (MPDC), a joint venture of Grindrod and DP World. The government has allowed the firm to manage the port until 2030 in order to upgrade much of its infrastructure that has been destroyed after years of stagnation. In 2010, the dredging works in the channel were finished and the Port of Maputo can now handle larger vessels – such as the Panamax vessels – with more cargo. In addition, investments are being made for specific types of terminals such as:
* Bulk liquids
* Granite
* Metals
* Coal

A new terminal for vehicles is also planned which will allow for 57,000 vehicles to be moved per year (Phase 1) with a peak 250,000 under an agreement with Höegh Autoliners as potential trans-shipment route between the Middle East and Europe. Coal will also be exported from the Matola side at a rate of 10 million tons per year. It is envisaged that by 2020, the port will generate about USD 160 million per year. By 2030, the port will be able to handle up to 25 trains a day and 1,500 trucks for a total of 50 million tons of cargo per year. The total investment will exceed USD 500 million.

===Other means===
A recent introduction are three-wheelers commonly known as tuk-tuks in some Asian countries. The three-wheeled bikes, called "tchopelas" by the population, are cheaper to own and run and have posed a commercial threat to conventional taxis.

==Architecture==
Maputo city council building
''A Casa de Ferro'' - The Iron House

Maputo had always been the center of attention during its formative years and this strong artistic spirit was responsible for attracting some of the world's most forward architects at the turn of the 20th century. The city is home to masterpieces of building work by Pancho Guedes, Herbert Baker and Thomas Honney amongst others. The earliest architectural efforts around the city focused on classical European designs such as the Central Train Station (CFM) designed by architects Alfredo Augusto Lisboa de Lima, Mario Veiga and Ferreira da Costa and built between 1913 and 1916 (sometimes mistaken with the work of Gustav Eiffel), and the Hotel Polana designed by Herbert Baker.

As the 1960s and 1970s approached, Maputo was yet again at the center of a new wave of architectural influences made most popular by Pancho Guedes. The designs of the 1960s and 1970s were characterized by modernist movements of clean, straight and functional structures. However, prominent architects such as Pancho Guedes fused this with local art schemes giving the city's buildings a unique Mozambican theme. As a result, most of the properties erected during the second construction boom take on these styling cues.

==Culture==
Maputo is a melting pot of several cultures. The Bantu and Portuguese cultures dominate, but the influence of Arab, Indian, and Chinese cultures is also felt.

===Film and cinema===
Before television was introduced in 1981, film and cinema had a prominent position as a form of entertainment in the lives of Mozambicans especially in Maputo where there were at least a dozen movie theaters by the time of independence. In the 1950s and 1960s, at the height of racial segregation, most of the movie-goers were either European whites or South Asians – each group having their own designated locale. Black Mozambicans, although more heavily discriminated against, also enjoyed movies in makeshift theatres, often in rooms temporarily converted to handle a projector, screen and chairs. Some of the cinemas can still be seen today, such as the Charlot, Gil Vicente, the Scala, 222 and the Dicca, although not all are still showing movies.

The movies screened at the theaters during Portuguese rule were heavily censored. Movies containing sex, violence and themes with a political nature were not allowed but despite these restrictions, it was the first time Mozambicans were able to enjoy entertainment that was prevalent in the rest of the world, thereby greatly increasing cultural affinity. After 1975 and the ensuing mass exodus of European whites, for a time no censorship regulations were in place and Mozambicans could watch content that was previously banned by the dictatorship, and the works of Bruce Lee became immensely popular. However, once FRELIMO and the nationalist movement gained momentum, any external influence considered as originating from the "decadent West" was again not allowed. It was at this moment that Mozambique's ruling party FRELIMO realized the immediate potential films could have in delivering propaganda relatively easily.

For much of the late 1970s and 1980s, the local film industry was geared towards creating "home-made" productions depicting Socialist ideologies which placed great influence on the family unit, the non-commercialized production of agriculture and political autonomy. Maputo has been the setting for many Hollywood blockbuster movies such as ''The Interpreter'', ''Blood Diamond'' and ''Ali''.

===Associação Núcleo de Arte===
The Mozambique National Library.
Telecommunications of Mozambique seat in Rua da Sé 2, Maputo

An important cultural and artists' centre in Maputo is the Associação Núcleo de Arte. It is the oldest collective of artists in Mozambique. Seated in an old villa in the centre of Maputo the Núcleo has played a significant role in metropolitan cultural life for decades. The two best known and most influential contemporary Mozambican artists started their career at Núcleo de Arte, the painter Malangatana Ngwenya and the sculptor Alberto Chissano. Over one hundred painters, sculptors and ceramists are members of the Núcleo, which regularly stages exhibitions on its own premises and over the last few years has actively participated in exchanges with artists from abroad. The Núcleo became well known for their project transforming arms into tools and objects of art. It played an important role for reconciliation after the Mozambican Civil War. The exhibition of art objects such as the Chair of the African King and the Tree of Life was shown around the world, among others in the British Museum in 2006.
Maputo is home to the Dockanema Documentary Film Festival, and international festival showcasing documentary films from around the world.

==Landmarks ==
During its five centuries of Portuguese colonialization, the city has gained several examples of Portuguese architecture. Most of the note-worthy buildings are former colonial administrative buildings or current government buildings.

The city's landmarks include:
Maputo's Tunduru Garden, with its Manueline arch

* Fortress of Maputo
* Maputo Railway Station - '''''Caminhos de Ferro de Moçambique (CFM)''''' 
* Independence Square 
* Maputo City Hall
* Samora Machel Statue
* The Museum of Natural History
* Vila Algarve – The former location of Portuguese Secret Police (PIDE)
* Hotel Polana
* Tunduru Gardens

==Places of worship==
Among the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Maputo (Catholic Church), Reformed Church in Mozambique (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Igreja Presbiteriana de Moçambique (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Convenção Baptista de Moçambique (Baptist World Alliance), Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, Assemblies of God, Zion Christian Church. There are also Muslim mosques.

==Parks==
A flowered terrace in Maputo

The city does not yet have a very expansive list of parks and other recreational areas. However, at the center of the city lies the Jardim Tunduru (Tunduru Gardens) which was formerly called the Vasco Da Gama Garden. It was designed in the 1880s by a British architect, Thomas Honney. The entrance of the park is designed in the Neo-Manueline style. After independence, the name was changed to the current one and a statue of the country's first president was erected.

==Education==
Maputo offers several options for education with pre-schools, primary, secondary schools and higher education institutions. The quality of the syllabus is said to differ greatly depending on whether an institution is private or public.

===Higher education===
Mozambique's largest higher education institution is the Universidade Eduardo Mondlane which was established in 1968 as the Universidade de Lourenço Marques. Most of the universities faculties and departments are located in the city of Maputo with nearly 8,000 students attending 10 faculties. Some faculties also exist in Beira, Quelimane, Nampula and Inhambane.

Since the 1990s there has also been a rapid growth of private education houses offering higher education such as ''Instituto Superior de Ciências e Tecnologias de Moçambique'' (ISCTEM), ''Instituto Superior de Tecnologias e Gestão'' (ISTEG) and ''Instituto Superior de Transportes e Comunicações'' (ISUTC).

===Secondary education===
In the secondary education market, there is again a strong divergence between private and public schooling.

Maputo's private schools include:
* Enko Nyamunda International School
* Escola Portuguesa de Moçambique
* French School of Mozambique
* Scuola Italiana Privata "Giovanni Falcone"
* Skandinaviska Skolan Maputo
* American International School of Mozambique
* The Aga Khan Academy, Maputo
* Princess Cinderella Kindergarten, Primary & High School
* Maputo International School
* Willow International School
* Canadian Montessori Academy
* Maputo International College 
*Colégio Kitabu
*Grandeur International School
*Acácias Secondary School
*ISCTEM Secondary School

Some expatriates have chosen to enroll their children in schools in Mbombela, South Africa and Waterford Kamhlaba in Mbabane, Eswatini.

==Health services==
Central Hospital of Maputo

Maputo has several hospitals and clinics, including the city and country's largest hospital, the Hospital Central de Maputo (Maputo Central Hospital). Other hospitals include the public Hospital Geral José Macamo, and the private Clinica Sommerschield, the Clínica Cruz Azul in ''baixa'' and Hospital Privado located across the Portuguese School.

The construction of Hospital Miguel Bombarda began in 1900. In 1976, Samora Machel renamed the hospital as ''Hospital Central de Maputo'' (HCM). The hospital has 1500 beds for in-patients and has an estimated staff number of 3000. It is made of a multi-block structure with 35 separate buildings spanning an area of 163,800 m2. The hospital has six departments: Medicine, Surgery, Pediatrics, Orthopedics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics. It also has divisions for Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology and a morgue. The hospital provides services for an average 700 out-patients a day and over  of washing is done daily. In the early 1990s, a section of the hospital was divided and turned into a private clinic offering higher quality services for those who could afford it called the ''Clínica Especial de Maputo''. The residence for the head of medicine is on the corner of ''Avenida Eduardo Mondlane'' and ''Avenida Salavador Allende''. It is a historically valuable structure which was completed in 1908 and has since the 1990s been converted into a charming restaurant with colonial themes called ''Restaurante 1908''. The upper floors are still used by the hospital as offices.

==Notable people==


* Al Bowlly, singer
* Carlos Cardoso, journalist
* Alberto Chissano, sculptor
* Moreira Chonguica, musician, composer, social activist
* Gilles Cistac, constitutional lawyer
* Mia Couto, writer
* Jose Craveirinha, poet
* Eusébio, footballer
* Ruth First, South African anti-apartheid activist
* Pancho Guedes, architect
* Teresa Heinz, philanthropist & political figure, widow of John Heinz and wife of American political figure John Kerry
* Josina Z. Machel, women's rights activist
* Malangatana, artist
* Henning Mankell, author, dramatist
* Mariza, fado singer
* Maria Mutola, runner
* Neyma, singer
* Alexandre Quintanilha, scientist
* Ricardo Rangel, photojournalist


==Twin towns – sister cities==

Maputo is twinned with:

* Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
* Ankara, Turkey
* Bissau, Guinea-Bissau
* Cape Town, South Africa
* Charles County, United States
* Chengdu, China
* Chennai, India
* Dili, East Timor
* Durban, South Africa
* Guarulhos, Brazil
* Harare, Zimbabwe
* Lagos, Nigeria
* Lisbon, Portugal
* Luanda, Angola
* Mbabane, Eswatini
* Port Louis, Mauritius
* Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
* Shanghai, China


==See also==

*Delagoa Bay
*Lourenço Marques (explorer)
*List of cities in Mozambique by population
*Metropolitan Maputo

==References==


==Bibliography==


==External links==
*
*
* Photos and Map of Maputo
* Maputo Port Development Company

















